---
title: Quantization, polynomial automorphisms, and the Jacobian problem.Speaker; A. Ya. Kanel-Belov
date: 2023-07-15
authors: []
---

## Knots, graphs and groups

### Abstract

Let $F: \mathbb{C}^n\to \mathbb{C}^n$ -- be a polynomial mapping of a complex space into itself. When is it reversible? The necessary condition is obviously local invertibility at every point. The famous *Jacobian problem* states that this condition is sufficient. For more than 20 years, until 1968, the Jacobian problem was considered solved for $n=2$, since then new "proofs" appear every few months.
The *Jacobian problem* is closely related to Dixmier's conjecture, the formulation of which for $n=1$ looks innocent: let $P, Q$~ be polynomials in $x$ and $(d/dx)$, and $PQ-QP=1$. Is it true that $(d/dx)$ can be expressed in terms of $P$ and $Q$. This claim has not yet been proven. Recently it was possible to prove that this assertion is equivalent to the Jacobian problem for $n=2$. The stable equivalence of the Jacobian and Dixmier conjectures is proved in http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0512171. The proof uses an analogy between classical and quantum objects. It is supposed to give an elementary explanation of this analogy and also to discuss Kontsevich's hypotheses.

Another, close, statement is called the Abienkar--Moh theorem and looks like an Olympiad problem (which it is). Let $P, Q, R$ be polynomials, and $R(P(x),Q(x))=x$. Prove that either the degree of $P$ divides the degree of $Q$, or vice versa. The *Abiancar problem* states that all embeddings of an affine line in $\mathbb{C}^3$ are isomorphic. Over $\mathbb{R}$ the answer is no -- there are polynomial knots, so Abyankar's problem can be viewed as a way to define a knot in an abstract algebraic way.

Significant advances in the Jacobian problem were made by the remarkable mathematician Yagzhev (a student of L.A. Bokut) who connected the subject with universal algebra. Burnside-Type Problems", Automorphisms in Birational and Affine Geometry (Bellavista Relax Hotel, Levico Terme -- Trento, October 29th -- November 3rd, 2012, Italy), Springer Proceedings in Mathematics & Statistics, 79, Springer Verlag, 2014, 249 -- 285 http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-05681-4_15, arXiv: 1308.0674

The first part of the report is an introduction to the problem and is supposed to be quite elementary.




