---
title: The photography method and invariants of higher manifolds coming from common sense
date: 2023-07-08
authors: [V.O. Manturov]
---

## Knots, graphs and groups

### Abstract

Manifolds can be encoded by triangulations and Pachner move. It is natural to look for certain "state-sum" formulas for invariants where the sum is taken over "weights" associated to some faces of a triangulation. For example, so are Turaev-Viro invariant.
Various Pachner moves give rise to various equations which have close ties with different branches of mathematics, the Pentagon relation the Yang-Baxter relation, the Zamolodchikov relation and so on.

How to solve such equations? In a recent paper, the author introduced the *photography method* saying that if in some *state* (say, triangulation of a pentagon) one can recover the *data* (say, lengths, areas) for any other state then if we pass from one state to the other, the information will not change.

This extremely simply proved statement gives rise to solutions of any equations valued ...everywhere.. Just by looking at elementary geometry, you can use your favourite formula(Ptolemy, Cayley-Menger or some formula from hyperbolic geometry) and get a guaranteed solution to equations corresponding to Pachner moves.

The two easy observations that
1) Any triangulation of a polytope is realised locally in the Euclidean (hyperbolic) space;
2) A triangulation of a manifold need not be realisable.

we obtain that
1) Our solutions give rise to invariants;
2) These invariants are non-trivial.

Going further and seeing similarity with line configurations and Desargues flips, one can construct invriants valued in more sophisticate geometrical construction.



