---
title: Classifying representations of the Thompson groups and the Cuntz algebra
date: 2023-10-25
authors: [Dilshan Wijesena]
---

## Moscow-Beijing topology seminar

### Abstract

Richard Thompson's groups $F$, $T$ and $V$ are one of the most remarkable discrete infinite groups for their several unusual properties. On the other hand, the celebrated Cuntz algebra has many fascinating properties and it is known that $V$ embeds inside the Cuntz algebra. However, classifying the representations of the Thompson groups and the Cuntz algebra have proven to be very difficult.
Luckily, thanks to the novel technology of Vaughan Jones, a rich family of so-called Pythagorean representation of the Thompson groups and the Cuntz algebra can be constructed by simply specifying a pair of finite-dimensional operators satisfying a certain equality. These representations carry a powerful diagrammatic calculus which we use to develop techniques to study their properties. This permits to reduce very difficult questions concerning irreducibility and equivalence of infinite-dimensional representations into problems in finite-dimensional linear algebra. Moreover, we introduce the Pythagorean dimension which is a new invariant for all representations of the Cuntz algebra. For each dimension $d$, we show the irreducible classes form a moduli space of a real manifold of dimension $2d^2+1$. Finally, we introduce the first known notion of a tensor product for representations of the Cuntz algebra.

 





