---
title: Dendriform algebras
date: 2024-04-01
authors: [Marı́a Ronco]
---

## Knots and representation theory seminar

### Abstract

Dendriform algebras are a special type of associative algebras whose product is the sum of two binary products, satisfying certain conditions, they were introduced by J.-L. Loday as Koszul dual of the enveloping algebras of a Leibniz algebra, with the aim of developing a theory of noncommutative Lie algebras (see [4]). The main examples of this type of algebra are associative algebras whose product is given by the shuffle product, and associative algebras equipped with a Rota-Baxter operator.
  
May be the first example of a dendriform algebra was described by S. Eilenberg and S. MacLane in [3]. They defined a half product on the simplicial complex of singular cochains of a topological space X, and described its relationship with the cup product.

  
Their result, and the idea of defining an algebraic theory whose free object is described by the vector space generated by the faces of the associahedra, motivated the introduction of two different types of dendriform algebras, equipped with an extra associative product: tridendriform algebras (see [5]), and K algebras. We unified both definitions by introducing q-tridendriform algebras, the case q = 1 corresponds to the tridendriform algebras defined in [5], while for q = 0 we recover Chapoton's K algebras.

  
We will give a detailed description of tridendriform algebras, as well as of their Koszul dual algebras called triassociative. Many interesting examples of 1-triassociative algebra were introduced in algebras of words by J.-C. Novelli and J.-Y. Thibon, while the main example of 0-tridendriform algebra is given by Eilenberg-MacLane constructions on simplicial complexes.

  
Afterwards, we want to explain the notion of tridendriform bialgebra, that is a tridendriform algebra equipped with a coassociative coproduct. The main result is that there exist a funtor from the category of 0-tridendriform bialgebras to the category of S_2 algebras, where an S_2 algebra is a differential algebra equipped with an associative cup product and a structure of brace algebra, as described by J. McClure and J. H. Smith in [6]. Our last result is a structure theorem for conilpotent tridendriform bialgebras, which states that such a bialgebra is an enveloping algebra of its subspace of primitive elements, which has a natural structure of S2 -algebra in the differential case of 0-tridendriform algebras, and a non-differential S2 -algebra for 1-tridendriform algebras. These last results were described in [1]

Instituto de Matemáticas, Universidad de Talca, Chile.


**References**

[1] E. Burgunder, M. Ronco, Tridendriform structure on combinatorial Hopf algebras, J of Algebra 324 (2010) 2860-2883

[2] F. Chapoton, Opérades Différentielles Graduées sur les Simplexes et les Permutoèdres, Bull. Soc. Math. France 130 (2) (2002) 233-251.

[3] S. Eilenberg and S. MacLane, Cohomology theory in abstract groups. I, Ann. of Math. 48 (1947), 51-78.

[4] J.-L. Loday, Algèbres ayant deux opérations associatives (digèbres), C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 321 (2) (1995) 141-146.

[5] J.-L. Loday, M. Ronco, Trialgebras and families of polytopes, in: Homotopy Theory: Relations with Algebraic Geometry, Group Cohomology, and Algebraic K -Theory, in: Contemp. Math., vol. 346, 2004, pp. 369-398.

[6] J E McClure, J H Smith, A solution of Deligne's Hochschild cohomology conjecture, in: Recent progress in homotopy theory (Baltimore, MD, 2000), Contemp. Math. 293, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI (2002) 153-193

[7] J.-C. Novelli, J.-Y. Thibon, Hopf algebras and dendriform structures aris- ing from the parking functions, Fund. Math. 193 (2007) 189-241.

  


