---
title: Inducing graph invariants from the universal $\mathcal{gl}$-weight system
date: 2024-02-21
authors: [Sergei Lando]
---

## Moscow-Beijing topology seminar

### Abstract

Weight systems, which are functions on chord diagrams satisfying certain 4-term relations, appear naturally in Vassiliev's theory of  nite type knot invariants.
In particular, a weight system can be constructed from any  nite dimensional Lie algebra endowed with a nondegenerate invariant bilinear form. Recently, M. Kazarian suggested to extend the $gl(N)$-weight system from chord diagrams (treated as involutions without  xed point) to arbitrary permutations, which led to a recurrence formula allowing for an e ective computation of its values, elaborated by Zhuoke Yang. In turn, the recurrence helped to unify the $\mathcal{gl}(N)$ weight systems, for $N = 1, 2, 3,\dots$, into a universal gl-weight system. The latter takes values in the ring of polynomials $\mathbb{C}[N][C_1,C_2,\dots]$ in in nitely many variables $C_1,C_2,\dots$ (Casimir elements), whose coe cients are polynomials in $N$.

The universal $\mathcal{gl}$-weight system carries a lot of information about chord diagrams and intersection graphs. The talk will address the question which graph invariants can be extracted from it. We will discuss the interlace polynomial, the enhanced skew-characteristic polynomial, and the chromatic polynomial. In particular, we show that the interlace polynomial of the intersection graphs can be obtained by a speci c substitution for the variables $n,C_1,C_2,\dots$. This allows one to extend it from chord diagrams to arbitrary permutations.

Questions concerning other graph and delta-matroid invariants and their presumable extensions will be formulated.

The talk is based on a work of the speaker and a PhD student Nadezhda

Kodaneva.

  




