---
title: Connectedness and combinatorial interplay in the moduli space of line arrangements.
date: 2024-03-27
authors: [Benoît Guerville-Ballé]
---

## Moscow-Beijing topology seminar

### Abstract

The moduli space of a line arrangement (also known as the realization space) captures important topological and geometric information about the arrangement. Due to Mnëv's Universality Theorem, such moduli spaces can behave as wild as one can imagine. Furthermore, the Pappus configuration shows that unexpected collinearity can appear among the singular points of an arrangements. In this talk, and despite these results, we focus on extracting topological information on the moduli space of line arrangements using only combinatorial techniques. In the first part, we investigate the combinatorial class of inductively connected line arrangements defined by Nazir and Yoshinaga. These arrangements are characterized by a recursive structure that ensures their moduli space to be an open Zariski subset of an irreducible algebraic variety, and so to be path-connected. The second part will be devoted to a continuation of their work. For any fixed line arrangement, we inductively compute a combinatorial upper-bound of the number of connected components of the moduli space. Our bound is based on a fine study of the equations governing the incidence relations, and more particularly of their degrees. It is shown to be sharp even for moduli space with an arbitrary large number of connected components. This is a joint work with Juan Viu-Sos.
  




